Application Tracking Systems

Applicant Tracking Systems (ATSes) are a tool many 
candidates speculate about, and ask the question: do 
ATSes reject resumes? Spoiler: they do not. Humans do.

Some of the most popular ATS systems used by tech 
companies are iCIMS, Taleo, Greenhouse, Workable and 
Workday. There are more than 100 ATS systems, and more 
entering the market over time. While a few never, niche 
ATS systems are starting to offer more advanced 
functionality with resume parsing, as of 2020, none of 
the major ATS systems reject resumes automatically, or 
hide them from recruiters. Resume processing for all, 
major systems is basic. Most of the added ATS 
functionality is outside the resume processing phase, and 
with how these systems integrate with other company 
internal systems, and help with reporting.

The purpose of an ATS is to help coordinate the 
application process, for recruiters within the company. 
It keeps track of the status of applications, and exposes 
this information to all recruiters. For example, this is 
how a sourcer will know not to reach out to a candidate 
who is currently interviewing with the company, or 
someone who has recently declined an offer.

Here is how a popular ATS, iCIMS displays candidates in 
the hiring pipeline for a specific position —people who 
applied on the career page, who have been referred, or 
who have been sourced and added by a recruiter:

The pipeline view in the iCIMS ATS—one of the popular ATS 
systems
The pipeline view in the iCIMS ATS: one of the popular 
ATS systems. Recruiters need to review the candidate to 
process. This usually means them scanning the resume.

The ATS workflow is human-based and goes roughly like 
this:

A typical Application Tracking System workflow.
A typical Application Tracking System workflow. The ATS 
helps keep track of the status of each applicant. Very 
handy, when you have more than a few people applying!

Boxes are statuses that represent the status of the 
application. It starts as “Unviewed applicant”, and will 
eventually become “Rejected”, “Accepted” or “Declined”. 
People - recruiters or hiring managers - move the status 
between one status, to another. For example, after a 
recruiter reviews the resume and the application, they 
will either move the status to “In Review” or “Rejected”. 
The statuses and the workflows can be different for each 
company. A big focus in the functionality for ATSes is 
the flexibility of setting these up.

For a more detailed explanation on how an ATS system 
works, see the video The Truth About the ATS (it’s not 
what you think) from Amy Miller. Amy is an experienced 
tech recruiter and the author of the Recruiting in Yoga 
Pants blog. She has recruited at Amazon, Google and 
Microsoft and shares the “behind the scenes” working of 
this process. In this video, she summarizes what an ATS 
is, and is not:

An ATS is a system to keep me organized, as a recruiter. 
We need to actually know, at a given point, in their 
journey, and what I need to do next. For example, if I’ve 
got someone at the interview stage, have I set it up? At 
the offer stage, has the offer been approved yet? Without 
an ATS, I don’t know what’s going on. I don’t know who is 
waiting on who, doing what thing. The ATS solves this 
problem.

The idea that the ATS is this mythical, genius, 
AI-infused tool is crazy. Anyone who has been in an ATS, 
and has used it for work is laughing at this idea. It’s 
so ridiculous.
ATS Myths Busted

This section is part of Chapter 2: The Hiring Pipeline in 
The Tech Resume Inside Out book.

ATS systems is a term that many resume builder sites and 
self-proclaimed career gurus use as a root cause of your 
resume being rejected. Almost all claims I have read on 
ATSes - from "robots" rejecting up to 75% of resumes to 
PDF formats not being advised—are wrong. 

These misleading sites and people share two traits. 
First, they promote services you can purchase from them 
to "beat the ATS". Second, they refer to sources that are 
not backed by technical recruiters or hiring managers who 
actually use ATSes. This book does not claim that it will 
"help you beat the ATS", because—as we'll cover— there is 
no "ATS to beat" for tech resumes. And all claims in this 
section are backed by technical recruiters and hiring 
managers who configure the ATS systems and use them, day 
to day.

Automated ATS rejections are one of the main fallacies 
many sites claim. Jobscan writes: “Whether that human 
recruiter ever sees your resume could depend on how well 
your resume is optimized for ATS algorithms.”. CNBC 
published the article 75% of resumes are never read by a 
human—here’s how to make sure your resume beats the bots. 
This article only references sources from companies who 
make a living selling resume services and claim that they 
provide resumes to “beat” this system. There is no hiring 
manager or tech recruiter backing up the contents —good 
luck finding professionals giving their name to incorrect 
facts. Take this claim from the article:

Most applications are removed from the equation because 
they are not formatted in a way these systems can read 
and interpret - a career expert with TopResume tells 
CNBC.

The claim that PDF resumes are “removed from the 
equation” is false, and the following advice, to use a 
Word document as a format, is also poor advice.

Tech recruiter Katherine Dumanoir, who works at Amazon 
shares how humans look at resumes, often working fast, to 
clear the queues, and keep the process moving:

Recruiter and HR expert Christine Zuul Assaf comes to the 
same conclusion, when she tracked down the sources for 
this article:

LinkedIn collected insights from recruiters on how 
companies really sort resumes, including advice from Amy 
Miller of Recruiting in Yoga Pants, who has been a 
recruiter at Amazon, Google and Microsoft:

For the majority—if not all—of the tech companies, these 
claims are simply false. Recruiters do go through 
applications in the ATS interface, and will almost always 
scan resumes. The only time a recruiter will not look at 
your resume, is when there are enough other, qualified 
candidates and they stop processing resumes.

Knockout and prescreening questions are the one part, 
where there can be truth to the claim of “The ATS 
rejecting” a candidate. These are questions that 
recruiters set up and are intended to filter out people 
who are not eligible for the position, irrespective of 
their resume. For example, if a company does not sponsor 
visas, a recruiter might add a question to the 
application form saying, “Will you need sponsorship in 
order to work?” People needing visas will then be 
rejected, following the policy for the role. However, it 
was the recruiter who set up this rule, and the data 
needs to be explicitly provided by the candidate.

You can read more about how prescreening works by looking 
at the documentation for ATSes. Taleo calls this 
information gathering prescreening questions, iCIMS names 
them screening questions, Greenhouse refers to them as 
custom questions, and they go by as form application 
questions with Workable. In all cases, recruiters can set 
up additional questions to gather information from 
applicants, and use this in the process. Here is the 
example of how a recruiter could set up a knockout 
question for visa status, in Workable:

Setting up a knockout question in Workable.
Setting up a knockout question in Workable. These are 
most frequently used to save time with candidates whom 
the company would not hire due to certain constraints.

For knockout and prescreen questions, you need to provide 
information on the job application form. This information 
is never taken from your resume.

ATS-compatible resumes are another fallacy. While it is 
true that most ATSes attempt to parse resumes, they don’t 
use the contents to filter for anything during the 
screening process. Resume parsing is done to attempt to 
auto-fill candidate details. Resume parsing is also used 
to allow for boolean searching in the system later on 
outside the application process. However, beyond 
attempting to match personal details, and indexing 
keywords found in the resume, ATSes don’t do anything 
clever. Both PDF and Word documents are parsed well 
enough. To get a sense of the type of searches a parsed 
resume supports, see this article on the iCIMS candidate 
search capabilities.

An “ATS-compatible” resume is more of a meaningless 
buzzword than anything else. Stating that a resume is 
ATS-compatible is like saying that a website is mobile 
phone compatible. Of course, it is. All websites are. And 
all resumes are ATS-compatible.

ATS resume optimization is a service several providers 
charge for - anywhere from $100 to $500 and beyond. They 
will claim that by matching the job description better, 
your resume will “bypass” the ATS algorithm, and a 
recruiter will look at your application. Claiming that 
there’s a need to “bypass” the ATS is a false claim in 
the majority of cases for tech jobs. As of 2020, ATSes 
are still far more simple than even to understand what 
programming languages you’ve listed on your resume. 
Second, there is no “bypass”. Your resume is in a queue, 
waiting for the recruiter to review.

The only popular ATS that does some type of rating based 
on parsed resumes is Taleo. Taleo can assign a 
requisition rank to your resume. This is a percentage 
number based on automated screening questions and your 
resume, and the job requisition overlapping. Recruiters 
can decide to sort resumes by this rank. However, this 
score is off for software developers. Few, if any, 
recruiters would rely on this to decide which resumes to 
look at, and which not to. None of the over a dozen tech 
recruiters and sourcers I’ve consulted have used such an 
automated rating to decide which applications to look at 
and which to pass on.

Tailoring your resume for the position is solid advice, 
though. This is the reason why you’d see results 
following ATS optimization techniques. If you tailor your 
resume for the job, you should see better results. The 
ATS itself won’t decide whether to move forward with your 
resume: the recruiter or hiring manager scanning your 
resume will. They will look to determine how relevant 
your experience is: and they’ll do this in a few seconds. 
As the number of applications for roles is almost always 
high, tailoring your resume for the position and grabbing 
attention with the first scan, do make a difference.

Some tech recruiters predict more automated parsing and 
AI-assisted decision making to come for hiring. However, 
this is not here just yet. Even when it will be, the 
outcome shouldn’t be different to a recruiter doing a 
quick resume scan, and marking the resume with a “Yes”, 
“Maybe” or “No” outcome.
From the inside out: what recruiters say about ATS 
systems

I asked technical recruiters to share some common 
misconceptions about Applicant Tracking Systems and 
explain why those beliefs are incorrect. Here a few top 
ones they shared:

Filtering happens with human intervention, not 
automatically. “The list of people in an ATS is organized 
by date when they applied. A real-life person then makes 
a decision. You can either be rejected: this can be due 
to not being a good fit based on your resume, or based on 
your answers to knockout questions. Or you progress in 
the process.” (Amy Miller, author of the Recruiting in 
Yoga Pants blog, previously recruited at Amazon, Google 
and Microsoft)

Tech recruiters would not trust an ATS to filter out 
candidates, as they could lose good people. “No recruiter 
I know would trust an ATS with filtering, even the 
slightest. They don’t want to risk losing otherwise 
perfectly good candidates. I’ve talked to many tech 
recruiters in the industry, and have never heard anyone 
relying on filtering based on automated parsing of CVs. 
The risk is too high.” (Csudi Csudutov, founder of Mimox 
tech recruiting and tech recruiter for over 20 years)

Submit PDFs CVs and you don’t need to worry about resume 
filtering. “ATSes are still so bad at filtering based on 
resume content that we get poorly formatted CVs, 
irrelevant profiles, or even blank pages. Personally, I 
suggest the best CV format being PDF. With Word 
documents, you risk ruining your format if the recruiter 
opens the document with another Word version or operating 
system. Agency recruiters also use Word CVs to remove 
your contact details to use it as business development 
material, so watch out!” (José Marchena, tech recruiter 
in London and host of the Coffee with a Recruiter 
podcast).
The chapter continues...

Get The Tech Resume Inside Out and carry on reading this 
chapter, with the sections:

    Referrals: why they are so important in getting a 
callback from a recruiter, and how you can get them.
    The priority of your resume: whether you are local, 
need relocation, or a visa can all matter. Learn how 
recruiters and hiring managers typically "prioritize" 
candidates.
    Less competitive hiring pipelines: while big tech 
hiring piplelines are extremely competitive, others are 
less so.
    Startup and small company hiring pipelines: 
understand how these differ from big companies, and 
mid-sized companies, and why cover letters might be your 
best shot at these places.
    Mid-sized companies with HR support: learn how you 
might have someone read your resume who is neither a 
recrutier, not a hiring manager, and how tailor your 
resume for this use case.
    ... and 13 other chapters with 215 pages of content 
and 17 contributing experts from the tech industry in 
(probably) the most comprehensive resume guide for 
software developers and engineering managers.

