

Background: I've been a hiring manager for 3 different 
companies, using two different ATSs. These companies have 
all been defense/aerospace.

The ATSs have been Workday and greenhouse.

I am currently hiring for 6 positions, 3 entry level and 
3 mid career at a pretty prestigious aerospace company. 
In the last month alone, I've reviewed 136 applications 
for these 6 positions.

This perspective may be different than a full software 
company, and as I've never worked for one, I am not 
speaking for those companies.

    Resumes are NOT auto rejected by an ATS. The ATS is 
simply there to keep track of applicants as they progress 
through the system. The only exception I know of, is when 
the HM sets up "must haves" in the system and when the 
applicant is applying, these questions are specifically 
asked. "Do you have a Secret clearance?" "Have you been 
in your current position for at least 12 months?" 
Answering no to those must have types of questions, is an 
auto reject by the system.

    Recruiters generally, have no idea what to look for 
in a resume for any particular job. I'm hiring engineers, 
and the recruiter likely doesn't have a technical degree, 
so they are generally unqualified to pre-screen resumes. 
As such, ALL resumes are pushed directly to the HM (or a 
delegate screener. I personally don't use delegates; I 
read every resume.)

    3 things that really irritate me:

a. Applying for a job you don't meet the basic 
qualifications of. I'm hiring engineers. But you have a 
degree in political science. Why would I hire you over 
the other 130 applicants that are engineers?

b. 2 column resumes and especially if you include a 
picture of yourself. It is obvious you are trying to make 
up space.

c. Not tailoring your resume to the job. If you decide to 
have an objective section, make it clear the job you are 
applying for is your objective. I can't count the number 
of resumes I've read, where the applicant wants to work 
in oil and gas or metallurgy, yet I'm looking for 
production engineers or something similar. If you are 
applying for a manufacturing job, put some experience or 
projects in your resume that match that job description.

4. The process takes time. It sucks, I know. I will 
review resumes on generally a daily basis then either 
reject or pass to the next stage immediately (not the 
norm for industry). It takes time to screen all the 
candidates and set up interviews. Plus, this is in 
addition to my actual job, so I have to make time to get 
this done.

5. Buzzwords, I would agree, are detrimental. However, 
keywords, not so much (goes to the tailoring for the 
job). If I'm looking for someone with MRB experience, I 
want to see in your resume things like "preliminary 
review" or "material review" or, even the keyword "MRB" 
Itself. As the hiring manager, I want to be able to 
quickly determine if you have the necessary 
qualifications. I don't want to have to read between the 
lines or make assumptions as to what you did because your 
resume was generalized.

6. I'm an expert in my field; I can smell the BS from a 
mile away. Padding your resume with fantastic claims of 
how you saved $2 million a year as an intern, is an 
immediate red flag. If the rest of your resume is good 
enough to get you to an interview, be damned sure I'm 
going to hit you on those fantastic claims and put you on 
the spot to justify them.

7. Yes, I can see how many other jobs within the company 
you've applied for. Does it matter? Kind of. If you've 
applied to 39 positions and they are all over the place 
in terms of function, it's easy to see if your resume 
aligns better with one of those other jobs and reject 
you. If you have 5 applications and they are all in the 
design space, that makes it much easier for me to tell 
this is what you want to do and I better get the process 
going before someone else snatches you up.

So, AMA.

