36 Resume Rules For Software Engineers
Software Engineering Career Advice

I've helped dozens of people land jobs at companies like 
Google, Lyft, Amazon, and Facebook. As an undergrad, I 
was a Software Engineering intern at Microsoft and Google 
and after graduation worked at Facebook.

From all this experience, I've reviewed hundreds of 
programmer's resumes and found that people kept making 
the same mistakes on their resumes over and over again. I 
don't blame them – they are too busy grinding Data 
Structures & Algorithms interview questions but it's 
like.... what's the point of coding interview prep if you 
don't even get called in for the interview?

That's why I created 7 general principles, with 36 
actionable tips, to improve a resume.
Short on time? Or prefer video to text?

I've talked about a few of these tips, and did a live 
resume review with YouTuber Singh in USA. If you learn 
better via video, or want to see me apply these tips 
live, check out the video below. But for the in-depth 
details, the guide below is your best bet.
Nick Singh reviews coding resume with Singh In USA 
(Harnoor Singh)

You can also watch me critique a real Data Science resume 
in a free lesson from my video course, Ace the Data Job 
Hunt! I also offer 1:1 coaching packages through my video 
course in case you want your resume reviewed!
Roasting Sarah Smith's Resume for 10 Minutes
Principle #1: The Sole Purpose Of Your Resume Is to Land 
an Interview

No resume results in an immediate job offer; that isn’t 
its role. What your resume must do is convince its 
recipient to shuttle you past the company’s gatekeepers 
and into their inner offices, so they can take a closer 
look at you. It is during the first interview—and any 
subsequent ones—that your fate is determined by the 
powers that be at the company you want to join. It is 
during the interview process that your technical coding 
and people skills will carry you toward an offer. Your 
resume merely opens the door to the all-important 
interview process.
Tip #1: Present a Short Resume

Seriously. Keep it to one page. Even if you have more 
than ten years’ experience, try for one page. Remember: 
you aren’t going for a job offer in it. Save whatever 
else you want to say for your in-person interview when 
you’ll be given ample time to get into the weeds and 
impress the interviewer with your breadth of knowledge 
and experience. Keep your resume short and sweet. (If you 
believe you’re the rare exception to this rule, see tip 
#2)
Tip #2: The Better You Are, The Less You Should Put on 
Your Resume

Drowning your accomplishments in irrelevant information 
is counterproductive. Stick to the highlights. They are 
what determine whether you’ll be invited through the door 
for an interview. Make the chief accomplishments on your 
resume as easy, and as obvious, as possible so the person 
who grants interviews can quickly consider you an 
outstanding candidate. (Extra filler doesn’t help, unless 
you have absolutely nothing of substance in the first 
place. And resume readers are rarely fooled by fluff.)
Tip #3: Make Your Resume Target the Exact Role You’re 
Seeking

What you throw a spotlight on during an interview 
changes, depending on the role you’re seeking. In the 
same way—and for the same reason—your resume should be a 
living document, not a catch-all for everything you’re 
good at. Throwing a bunch of stuff at a wall, hoping some 
of it sticks, isn’t a sound strategy. I’ve seen what I 
call “fence-sitting resumes” where candidates are doing 
their best to straddle two roles: Product Management and 
Software Engineering. But it’s key to have two different 
resumes, so you can cast a spotlight on relevant 
experiences, depending on the position you’re seeking. 
When I was in search mode for my next position, I had one 
resume tailored to back-end/ data infrastructure roles, 
and another tailored to product engineering & growth 
engineering roles.
Tip #4: Tailor Your Resume to a Specific Company

Alter your resume to reflect the exact company you’re 
applying to. For example, when I applied to government 
contractors, I put ‘U.S. Citizen’ at the top of my resume 
so the recruiter would know I had the proper background 
to work on sensitive projects. Giving them what they need 
to know upfront helps them know you recognize their 
screening process and that they aren’t wasting their time 
talking to an unqualified person, so they can focus fully 
on your resume. But leading with ‘U.S. Citizen’ at many 
other companies wouldn’t make sense.

Here’s another example. Let’s say you worked as a social 
media assistant part-time three years ago promoting your 
aunt’s restaurant. This experience isn’t relevant for 
software engineering roles and can be left off your 
resume. But if you’re applying to Facebook, and 
interested in ads, it’s worth including. Tailor. That. 
Resume.

For more concrete examples, enroll in my video course to 
watch me tailor Sarah Smith's resume for 3 different 
jobs:
Tip #5: Omit Non-Relevant Jobs

Google doesn’t care that you were a lifeguard two summers 
ago. Get rid of all non-relevant jobs. The exception to 
this rule is if you have zero job experience. If that’s 
the case, leave the job in to prove you’ve held a 
position that required sobriety, alertness, and 
responsibilities before.
Principle #2: Build Your Resume To Impress The Recruiter

The person you most need to impress is a non-technical 
recruiter. The Senior Software Engineer at the company 
you want to work for isn’t your target audience; she’ll 
be impressed based on your coding ability later, during 
your technical interviews. The hiring manager isn’t your 
audience; she’ll be impressed by your GitHub project 
portfolio and behavioral interview answers during your 
onsite hiring manager interview.

Keeping your audience in mind, it’s the non-technical 
recruiter that your resume needs to impress.
Tip #6: Get To ‘Yes’ in 15 Seconds

Recruiters are busy people. They meet candidates at 
crowded career fairs. They receive dozens of emails and 
LinkedIn requests every day from job hunters. They have 
brief moments to review your resume. So, ask yourself: 
“Is my resume understandable in 15 seconds?” If you can 
say “Yes, I should become a viable candidate within 
15seconds of reading this”, your job is done. That’s why 
the tips under Principle 1 are crucial; too many details 
make it impossible to get to ‘yes’ in under 15 seconds.
Tip #7: Your Resume Must Make Sense to A Non-Technical 
Person

Spell out technical acronyms if they aren’t obvious. Give 
a little background; don’t just assume the reader will 
understand. For example, a research project called 
“Continuous Deep Q-Learning with Model-based 
Acceleration” doesn’t make sense to most people, but 
“Flappy Bird Bot Using Deep Learning” is memorable and 
more intriguing to the average non-technical recruiter.
Tip #8: Break Formatting Rules to Make your Resume More 
Understandable

Bold any words that make your resume easier to understand 
so the reader can get to yes in 15 seconds. For example, 
I made the size of the companies I worked at bigger than 
other text so that, while scanning my resume, a recruiter 
could quickly see and say, “Microsoft Intern. Check. 
Google Intern. Check. Okay, let’s interview this kid.”
Tip #9: Report Usage Numbers If You Can.

People are interested in people. Consumer products are 
sexier than enterprise products. If your software served 
actual users, say so. Talking about user metrics shows 
that you were able to complete code and get it in front 
of real people who derived real value. Even if the 
project is technically simple, real user count goes a 
long way.

For example, in college, I made RapStock.io. It wasn’t 
very well designed, and the code wasn’t complex but, at 
its peak, it had 2,000 Monthly Active Users. This 
experience opened many doors in addition to giving me a 
great story to tell.
Tip #10: You’re Applying to a Business So Talk Business

If you’re applying to a business and your recruiter might 
be a business major, quantify your work in business 
terms. Write out the specific dollars earned, or dollars 
saved, as a result of your work. Most recruiters would 
rather read about the software you wrote that made $2,000 
in revenue than a side project where you solved P vs. NP 
because it’s hard to explain P vs. NP and why it matters 
on a resume unless you describe it with secondary results 
like ‘Won a Nobel Prize’. But $2000 cash is $2000 cash; 
no explanation needed.
Principle #3: Your Resume Should Make You Look Good

Sounds obvious enough. But I’ve seen people volunteer 
negative information. A more common problem is 
volunteering neutral information. Remove whatever 
information subtracts from the positive content in your 
resume.
Tip #11: Remove the Summary / Objective

Your aim must be to look exceptional, not typical or 
neutral. How yawn-some is this: “I am a hard-working, 
innovative developer looking for a Software Engineering 
Job in Summer 2019”. And this section is usually right at 
the top of a resume, taking up valuable real estate!
Tip #12: Break Section Order When Necessary to Stand Out

In English, we read from top to bottom. And since you 
have just 15 seconds to impress a recruiter, you need to 
look undeniably attractive as a candidate super-fast. To 
do this, put your strongest selling points at the top. 
Lead with your internship experience and then follow it 
up with your ‘Education’ section.

Here’s a thumbs down example: I’ve seen people list 
‘Technologies’ ahead of the cool projects they’ve made. 
Recruiters don’t care that you know twelve programming 
languages. They just care about the cool things you’ve 
made with the technologies you know.
Tip #13: Break Chronological Order When Necessary

Your resume doesn’t have to be chronological. Order it 
based on importance and impressiveness. For example, I 
had a friend who interned at Google one summer, then at a 
small local startup part-time after that. It’s okay to 
keep Google at the top of the resume, ahead of the small 
local startup, even though the startup was more recent. 
List first what makes you look best to the recruiter 
you’re targeting.
Tip #14: To Show Highlights, Bend Formatting Rules

Good design principles aren’t paramount. You just need to 
get results. So, break traditional formatting rules 
whenever doing so shows off your strengths faster.

For example, traditionally, you should bold only section 
headings and titles. But I bolded the user metrics for 
RapStock.io on my resume. I wanted to quickly call out 
this information because it was sandwiched between 
additional information about my projects. So, use bold or 
italicized font to put a point across.
Tip #15: Don’t Be Humble—But Don’t Lie or Exaggerate

Your resume should make you shine so don’t be humble or 
play it cool. If you deserve credit for something, put it 
on your resume. But never lie or overstate the truth. 
It’s easy for a recruiter or other company employee to 
chat with you about projects and quickly determine if you 
did it all or if it was actually a 3-person group project 
you’re passing off as your own.
Tip #16: Include Your High School?

Traditional advice says get rid of high school 
information on your resume. I disagree. If you attended a 
top high school like Stuyvesant, Phillips Exeter, or 
Thomas Jefferson High School for Science & Technology (go 
Colonials!), put it on your resume. This is especially 
true if the high school you attended is more prestigious 
than the college you attended.
Tip #17: Include Your SAT Score or Other High School 
Accomplishments?

Even though SAT scores don’t matter after you get into 
college, an impressive score is an impressive score. If 
you achieved a high score (2350 or above), include it. 
Traditional career advice says to leave out high school 
stuff, but I’ve had recruiters & interviewers mention it 
and be impressed by it even six years after the exam was 
taken.

Other notable high school accomplishments that might be 
relevant: USAMO, USACO, ISEF, Siemens STS, or Coca-Cola 
Scholarship.
Principle #4: Offer the Right Resume to The Right League

Know the league of companies you’re applying to. And be 
honest with how impressive your resume is. Sometimes, 
something that looks good at one tier of companies is a 
negative signal at another tier of companies. PLEASE 
NOTE: The advice in this section is tailored for applying 
to top-tier tech companies like Facebook and Google. (You 
can ignore this advice if top-tier tech companies aren’t 
your targets.)
Tip #18: List A GPA Only When it Helps

A 3.4 at MIT might be okay to list. But a 3.5 at a 
no-name easy college might not be something to volunteer 
if Google doesn’t usually recruit at your college since 
Google might be expecting you to be at the top of your 
class.
Tip #19: Not All Languages & Technologies Are Equal

When applying to top-tier Silicon Valley startups, 
ASP.NET / C# isn’t super great to lead with, since you 
might be perceived as being a slow corporate I.T. 
developer rather than a startup ‘hacker’. (It’s an unfair 
bias, but I’m telling it like it is.) Similarly, never 
list Microsoft Office. For a certain tier of companies, 
it can be a negative signal to write that you know 
Microsoft Office since it shows you didn’t have anything 
better to list.
Tip #20: Remove Certifications

Being a certified Oracle Java programmer won’t open any 
doors at top-tier companies. It might even hurt you since 
it’s perceived that if you needed certifications to prove 
your competence, you aren’t very competent since the bar 
for certifications is so low. Having projects that use 
Java, or open-source contributions to Java packages, is a 
far better way to show Java proficiency.
Tip #21: Don’t Over-Emphasize Technologies

In the right league, you don’t need to do overemphasize 
specific packages and libraries you know. Good software 
engineers are expected to learn new languages quickly and 
be experts at software engineering in general, not 
specific languages. Mentioning that you know Python, PIP, 
Virtualenv, BeautifulSoup, Scrapy is a negative signal. 
It makes a recruiter think all you’ve done is downloaded 
a few Python packages and listed it on your resume.
Tip #22: The Higher the Company Tier, The Higher the B.S. 
Detector

The more prestigious the company, the less you need to 
rely on corporate B.S. speak. You don’t need details 
about how you ‘communicated with multiple teams and 
worked with teammates to problem-solve solutions.’ 
Similarly, writing that you followed an ‘agile 
methodology’ doesn’t mean much. The higher the league of 
the company, the more they care about actual specific 
details and substance.
Principle #5: Resumes: It’s All About the Narrative

A good story is a powerful thing.
Tip #23: Humans Love Stories

Resume readers are relational human beings. If they like 
you better than they like other candidates, they will 
help you land an interview. People love a good story. By 
remembering that resume readers are human, you’ll end up 
crafting a better story which leads to a better resume.
Tip #24: Break Resume Rules for the Narrative

You can break any of the tips I’ve listed for what makes 
a good resume for the sake of the narrative. Earlier, I 
mentioned that listing irrelevant jobs—like being a 
cashier or waiter—won’t help you land a software 
engineering gig. But go ahead and tell your story if, for 
example, you were a waiter who went on to build an app 
that helps restaurants donate leftover food to food 
banks. Another example: people might advise you against 
linking to your hip hop mixtape on Soundcloud from your 
resume. But if you’ve made a few hackathon projects 
around hip-hop music, it’s perfectly fine to list it 
since it shows a recruiter that you took your passions 
and created software to further the interest. That’s a 
great story.
Principle #6: Simple Resume Basics that People Get Wrong 
Or Overlook

I started with unconventional tips since they’re the most 
interesting, but let’s cover the basics of resumes too.
Tip #25: Make Your Name Prominent

Self-explanatory. Near your name, add a professional 
email address too. Also, not a Yahoo mail or Hotmail 
addresses. Tech folks are judgy.
Tip #26: Never Include your Mailing Address

Companies are biased toward hiring local candidates 
because they don’t need to pay relocation fees. And 
recruiters are compensated based on the number of 
candidates they can close. So, put yourself in a 
recruiter’s chair. Let’s say you’re a Silicon 
Valley-based company recruiter with two 
identically-skilled candidates, but one lives in the Bay 
area and the other lives in NYC. Which of the two are you 
more likely to close? The NYC candidate who needs to 
decide to move to SF and uproot her family before 
accepting your offer or the local person who can accept 
your offer and start next week? You get the picture.
Tip #27: Don’t List Your Phone Number Unless It’s Local

Because of the spam robocall epidemic, anyone who calls 
you will email you first to ask for your phone # and set 
up a time. So, there’s no need to list a phone number. 
Remember: you have 15 seconds to rivet someone to your 
resume. Don’t waste a second of that time on 
non-essential information. Note: if yours is an 
international phone number, again, there may well be a 
bias toward hiring local candidates. And people notice 
when your number has is a far-flung area code. (When I 
interviewed for a Silicon Valley position, I made a 
Google Voice number with the Palo Alto area code. I 
wanted to hide the fact that I lived 3,000 miles away as 
best I could.)
Tip #28: Include Your GitHub And Personal Portfolio 
Website Link

Your links don’t need to be super prominent. It’s okay if 
the GitHub is a bit messy. It’s okay if the portfolio 
website is super simple. I made mine with a free default 
template from Bootstrap. Simply having a GitHub listed is 
a sign that you have coded out in the open and that 
you’re aware of source control. And remember: since the 
first interview gatekeeper is a non-technical recruiter, 
he or she most likely won’t be able to tell a messy 
GitHub from an okay one anyway.

If you want more inspiration on what a good portfolio 
project even looks like, watch this video on 6 Data 
Science Portfolio Projects Recruiters Will Love:

‍
Tip #29: Hyperlink to Outside Work Where Possible

Include links to your app store, or landing pages, or 
hackathon projects wherever possible. Linking to the 
outside world validates to the recruiter that you made 
something and published it to the real world. Even if the 
recruiter never clicks on a link, just seeing the blue 
hyper-link will give him or her a sense that there’s 
something more there.
Tip #30: You Don’t Need Full Sentences

Your resume isn’t a formal English paper, it’s marketing 
collateral that will be skimmed for 20 seconds. Bullet 
points of your main ideas are fine.
Principle #7: Good Products Need Good Distribution. Same 
with A Resume.
Tip #31: Save Your Resumes as PDFs

PDFs maintain formatting better and lead to better 
viewing experiences on mobile.
Tip #32: Save Your Resumes as ‘First Name Last Name 
Company Name Resume’

When people name it “Resume.pdf” it shows a lack of 
forethought. I have scores of files on my computer titled 
‘Resume.pdf’ from random people and I can’t keep track of 
them. I bet a recruiter has far more. Plus, you should be 
making different resumes for different companies and 
roles anyway, as mentioned earlier, so saving them with a 
company name will help you be more organized.
Tip #33: Change Margins to Your Favor

You can change the width and height of your resume to 
give yourself more space and breathing room so you can 
use different font sizes and spacing to emphasize 
different parts of it. But—again—don’t use margin changes 
to double the content on your one-page resume. If you do, 
you’ll drown out your best content with less-good/neutral 
junk.
Tip #34: Print Your Resume on Heavier Paper

At a traditional career fair, print your resume on 
heavier paper. Doing this will make the resume stand out, 
and it will feel more professional. (And heavier paper is 
more crumple-resistant.)
Tip #35: Bring Your Resume Everywhere

Now that you have a good resume, bring a printed version 
to every interview, career fair, company info session, 
and hackathon. (Doing this one simple thing helped me 
land my internship with Microsoft. More on that later.)
Tip #36: Get A Folio to Carry Your Resumes

Crumpled resumes look unprofessional. University 
bookstores usually sell a school-branded folio. 
Especially if you went to a top school, get a folio with 
the school logo front and center. It sure won’t hurt to 
carry it with you to your interview
