Your resume is only as good as the message it delivers

Are you struggling to write the perfect resume? If the answer is yes, 
you're not alone. Unless you've had a lot of experience creating resumes, 
chances are that you're unsure about what to include and how to create a 
truly compelling message that can capture an employer's interest. If so, 
then you could almost certainly benefit from some incredibly useful resume 
tips.

In this post, we'll explore 17 of the top resume tips and tricks used by 
many of the most accomplished resume writers in the industry. By 
incorporating these tips into your resume creation strategy, you should be 
able to craft the type of resume that can help you to win more interviews 
and land a fantastic job.
The basics: top 10 resume tips you need to know

We'll begin with the top 10 resume tips every job seeker needs to know to 
craft a compelling resume. One of the reasons that so many job seekers 
struggle with resume creation is that they just don't know what employers 
expect to see in a solid resume offering. These 10 tips can help you to 
ensure that your resume meets those expectations in a way that captures 
their attention.
1.     Gather your resume information before you begin

Our first tip may seem obvious, but you'd be surprised how many job 
seekers fail to follow it. Before you even begin to lay out your resume, 
start by gathering all the information you'll need to spin your resume 
narrative. Try to keep it as organized as possible, so that you have the 
facts you need readily available as you create each part of your resume.

That information includes:

    All the contact details that an employer will need to reach out with 
an interview or job offer

    A comprehensive list of your skills

    Your work history, including company names, job titles, and employment 
dates

    A list of your most notable achievements in each role

    Your educational history, including certifications and continuing 
education

    Information about any volunteer activity

    Details about relevant awards

    Any other relevant information that can demonstrate your 
qualifications

2.     Select the right format for your resume

You should also focus on picking the right format for your resume - a 
decision that will largely depend on your experience level and career 
needs. There are three formats available:

Reverse-chronological. This format option is simple to use and the most 
popular choice for job seekers. It simply requires you to list your 
employment history and education in reverse-chronological order, starting 
with the most recent position you've held. As for why it's so popular, the 
answer is simple: most employers prefer to see resumes using this format.

Functional. The functional resume format is sometimes used by job seekers 
who have little experience or who are trying to switch careers. It focuses 
most of its attention on your skills, rather than career experience. 
Unfortunately, many employers view it with a skeptical eye, so make sure 
that it's the best option for you before you use it for your resume.

Combination. The combination, or hybrid, resume offers a balanced mix of 
those two extremes. It focuses equally on experience and skills, while 
also employing the reverse chronological technique in its employment 
section. It can be used by career-changers, those with gaps in their work 
history, and veteran workers who have a great deal of experience.

Related post: The Best Resume Format to Get Hired
3.     Use a clear structure

When it comes to useful resume tips, we'd be remiss if we failed to note 
the importance of using a clear and easy-to read structure. To achieve 
that goal, you need to separate distinct types of information into their 
own sections, so that employers can quickly identify the information they 
want to see. Every great resume includes the following sections:

    Contact information

    Headline

    Summary paragraph

    Skills section

    Work experience

    Education

You can also include additional optional sections like awards, volunteer 
work, and other relevant information. Just make sure that those sections 
contain details that add to your resume narrative by further highlighting 
your qualifications for the job you're seeking.

Related post: 11 Key Things to Put on Your Resume
4.     Include all relevant contact information

Speaking of contact information, it's important to include multiple ways 
for employers to reach you for interviews. So, in addition to your full 
name, you'll want to provide a phone number, email address, and 
professional social media URL (for example, LinkedIn). You may also 
benefit from including your professional website, if it contains examples 
of your work that employers need to see.
5.     Create a compelling resume headline

It's also helpful to add a headline right below your contact information. 
Many job seekers just list the job title that they're seeking. However, 
you can use this headline space to create a more compelling message that 
can help your resume to stand out from the competition. To do this, create 
a headline that includes that job title along with descriptive language 
that can capture the employer's attention.

For example, if you're applying for a position as an Office Manager, you 
can add more flavor to your headline by writing something like:

Dynamic Office Manager with 7 Years of Experience in Productivity 
Enhancement and Cost Management
6.     Use a resume summary instead of an objective statement

If you're used to including an objective statement on your resume, then 
this tip is for you: try a resume summary instead. While an objective 
statement can be a wonderful way to outline your career goals, it's not 
really something that captures an employer's imagination. After all, 
employers are more interested in what you can do for them.

A properly constructed resume summary paragraph can be the best way to 
make that case in the briefest way possible. This short, three- to 
five-sentence paragraph should help you to highlight your relevant 
experience, top skills, and quantifiable achievements, creating the job 
search equivalent of a salesperson's elevator pitch.

Related post: 27 Great Resume Summary Examples to Get Hired
7.     Don't forget to include soft skills

As you craft your core competencies or skills section, make sure that you 
include more than just the key hard skills listed in the job posting. 
Those job-specific skills are important and need to appear in your resume, 
but they typically won't be sufficient to help you differentiate yourself 
from rival candidates. To do that, you will also need to include relevant 
soft skills. In fact, those soft skills may be the thing that separates 
your resume from everyone else's.

Related post: Soft Skills Explained - and the Top 7 for Your Resume
8.     List relevant jobs in your professional experience section

Start with your most recent job and work your way backward. The perfect 
resume should detail all your relevant professional positions within the 
past 10 to 15 years. If you recently graduated from college, include your 
internships and any work experience that took place since you entered 
college.

For each role, list the following information:

    Company Name.

    Job Title. If your title is specific to your organization, you can 
include a translation of sorts in parentheses next to your official job 
title.

    Start and End Dates. Include the month and year for each of these 
dates.

    Achievements. Brainstorm a list of your accomplishments and major 
contributions that benefited the organization during your tenure.

9.     Focus on achievements, not responsibilities

You'll notice that we advised you to include achievements for each job 
listing, rather than your job duties or responsibilities. The reason for 
that is simple: employers know that every worker has responsibilities, so 
including that information on its own in your resume won't impress anyone. 
However, if you can include actual achievements, and quantify them with 
real numbers, it will help employers to understand the type of value that 
you can provide if they hire you.

For example, how did you help save the company money, generate revenue, 
improve customer satisfaction, or increase productivity? Include real 
numbers, along with dollar and percentage signs to highlight that value.
10.  Include the right educational details

Create a record of all your education, beginning with your most recent 
degree. List the institution, its location, the name of your degree, your 
major and minor, your graduation year, and any honors associated with the 
degree, such as summa or magna cum laude. Do the same for any relevant 
certifications you've obtained or additional training opportunities or 
workshops you've attended.
Five tips for writing a resume that gets seen

While the preceding ten resume tips are vital for ensuring that you create 
the most compelling resume possible, the following five tips can take your 
resume from average to exceptional if you use them correctly.
11.  Use the right keywords

Let's begin with keywords. Many employers use applicant tracking systems, 
or ATS, that scan your document to rank candidates. That system will look 
for specific keywords in your resume. If it finds those keywords, you'll 
have a better chance of passing the screening and moving on to the next 
stage of the review process. If the ATS doesn't find those keywords in 
your resume, your candidacy will be at an end.

So, what are keywords and what should you do with them? You can typically 
find the right keywords by reviewing the job posting and job description. 
Pay careful attention to required skills, experience, and educational 
credentials. The terms used to describe those required qualifications will 
usually be the same words and phrases that the ATS searches for.

You can create a list of those keywords and simply insert them in your 
resume - in the summary statement, skills list, and other sections. Always 
be sure to use the exact terminology you find in the job posting, to 
ensure that you have the right keywords in your resume.
12.  Make sure that employers can easily skim your resume

It's also vital to think about how employers review resumes. The fact is 
that few resumes are read from beginning to end, unless they manage to 
somehow capture an employer's interest in the first few seconds. Most 
hiring managers only skim through each resume until they find that point 
of interest. Knowing that, your job is to make sure that their attention 
is grabbed as early as possible, to entice them to spend more time on 
their review.

Make sure that your resume can be easily skimmed by keeping it 
well-organized and tightly focused on your qualifications and value as a 
potential employee. You should pay attention to the details - like using 
power verbs to start your bullet points, to ensure that the first few 
words in each of those achievements draws the reader in and captures their 
attention.
13.  Skip the fancy design elements

You'll also want to make sure that your resume uses a simple, basic 
design. Don't try to incorporate tables, text boxes, images, or unusual 
fonts. Many applicant tracking systems struggle to read those types of 
design elements, which means that your complex resume design may never be 
seen by human eyes.

Stick to simple formatting tricks like bullet points, bold or italicized 
text, and clear section labels.
14.  Save your resume in the right file format

One of the most important resume tips you need to learn involves the 
document format that you use when you save your resume. Most employers 
will want to see either a Word document or PDF file, so stick to one or 
both of those options. Most ATS can read these files. Of course, if a 
company requests a certain file format, you should always follow those 
instructions.
15.  Name your file correctly

It's also important to ensure that your file doesn't get lost when you 
submit it to the company. That's why it's so important to give your resume 
file a name that can be easily found by any prospective employer. Don't 
send a file named “My resume,” since that document may be difficult for 
hiring managers to manage. Instead, provide more details by using a file 
name like:

“John Doe's Office Manager Resume”
Two tips to help you avoid immediate rejection

Our last two tips are designed to help you avoid being immediately 
rejected by employers. Both are critically important for ensuring that you 
avoid making a bad impression on your readers.
16.  Proofread the document

If you want to get your resume rejected as quickly as possible, filling it 
with misspellings, poor punctuation, inaccurate information, and bad 
grammar is one of the best ways to do it. Naturally, that's the last thing 
you want to do when you're hoping to land an interview and job offer. 
Fortunately, there's a straightforward way to avoid that fate: proofread 
your resume. In fact, you should proofread it several times to ensure that 
it's as perfect as possible.

We also recommend that you take that proofreading to the next level by 
having someone else review it after your edits are done. Find a friend or 
family member with strong English skills and ask them to read it several 
times. Make sure that it's someone who won't be shy about critiquing your 
work!
17.  Update your resume and tailor it to each job

The last of our resume tips is all about freshness and proper targeting 
for the job you seek. As a rule, you should try to update your resume 
every few months, even if you're not changing jobs that often. That will 
allow you to update your achievements and skills in real-time, so that you 
don't struggle to remember your accomplishments the next time you're 
looking for a job.

In addition, you need to make sure that you modify your resume every time 
you submit it to another company, to ensure that it specifically targets 
the job you're seeking. Effective tailoring will require you to adjust 
your included keywords to match the job posting, add or omit relevant 
skills to ensure that you meet the job's requirements, and potentially 
change your headline and resume summary to align with the company's needs.

With six seconds to make the right impression, your resume format matters.

Recruiters spend less than 10 seconds reviewing a resume before deciding 
if a candidate is a good fit for the job. When you have so little time to 
make the right impression, how you format the contents of your resume is 
just as important as what information you choose to include, which means 
choosing the right resume format is essential. 
What are the most common resume formats?

If you search online, you'll notice that three types of resume formats 
commonly come up in search results. They are the:

    Chronological or reverse-chronological format

    Hybrid or combination format

    Functional format 

Regardless of the format, the goal of any resume is to grab the attention 
of hiring managers. Depending on your circumstances, however, not all 
resume formats are created equal when it comes to meeting this goal, as 
you'll discover in the following few sections. 
What should you consider when choosing the right resume format?

There are certain factors that are critical when determining the right 
resume format. These include:

    Your work history

    The role you're applying to

    The industry

    Gaps in employment

    Current career goals

Where a chronological format might be best for many, a functional or 
hybrid format might be better for others. In the following sections, we 
explore when you should use one of the three formats based on various 
circumstances. 
What is a chronological format?

The chronological resume, also known as a reverse-chronological resume, 
has been the most common format used for years and is still one of the 
most popular formats used today. In a chronological resume, your most 
recent work experience is listed first, with the rest of your work history 
listed in reverse chronological order. 

This layout puts what matters most to employers – your most recent 
experience – near the top of your resume. A few other benefits of this 
format include the following:

    Since it's commonly used, recruiters and hiring managers are 
conditioned to know where to look to find the information they're seeking. 
As a result, they can quickly scan your resume to determine if you're a 
potential fit. 

    Most applicant tracking systems are programmed to read a 
reverse-chronological resume format easily. This means that using this 
format increases your chances of getting into the hands of a human reader 
compared to a format like the functional resume.

    A chronological format makes it easy to know where to place and how to 
order your information. Your resume begins with your contact information, 
followed by your resume profile or summary, work history, and education 
sections. Additional sections can be included, though if you at least 
include these sections with the right type of content, your resume can 
indeed capture the attention of an ATS and hiring team. 

When should you use a chronological resume?

The chronological format is the right resume format for individuals with a 
traditional career trajectory. If you've held jobs with a typical 
progression within the same field or industry, for example, with little to 
no gaps in employment, a chronological resume is a great choice.  In other 
words, the chronological resume is a common choice and works well for 
those applying for a job in the same field or industry that aligns with 
most of their professional experience.

Suppose you're someone whose career path hasn't followed a traditional 
path, or you're looking to change careers, or your employment history has 
gaps. In those cases, the chronological format might not be the right 
resume format for you. Instead, you might be better off choosing a hybrid 
or functional resume. 
What is a hybrid resume format?

The hybrid resume, also known as a combination resume, combines both 
functional and chronological information into one format. It includes a 
professional summary and an “Areas of Expertise” or “Career Achievements” 
section at the top of the resume that outlines your key qualifications, 
skill sets, and achievements. This section is followed by a 
reverse-chronological listing of your work history that puts these selling 
points into perspective by describing how you leveraged your skills with 
each role you've held and what you were able to accomplish as a result.

Resume writers often prefer the combination resume format for several 
reasons:

    First, writers know that recruiters prefer to see all of your 
experience lumped together in reverse chronological order. 

    Second, most applicant tracking systems (ATS) do a better job at 
reading and interpreting a hybrid format because they rely on 
chronological data to parse much of your application. 

    Third, this format gives you an opportunity to clearly support your 
skill sets by tying each qualification back to a specific position within 
your professional history.

Also, in today's world, it's more common than it used to be for 
individuals to change careers more than once or hold positions across 
different fields and industries, making a combination resume the better 
option over a traditional chronological format. 

A hybrid resume includes the following information:

    Contact information

    Resume summary or profile

    Core competencies or skills list

    Career aptitudes or achievements

    Professional experience

    Education

Since the combination format is flexible in nature, you can opt to 
emphasize your skills first and then your professional experience or vice 
versa. If you have highly relevant skills that you feel will make your 
resume stand out, for example, you might choose to emphasize those before 
your Work History section. Additional sections can be included, though you 
might not have room depending on how much space you need to emphasize your 
skills and professional experience. 
When should you use a hybrid format?

A hybrid resume format works well for those with a diverse career history 
or who are changing careers, and it might not be immediately apparent how 
your past experience is relevant to the job you're applying to. In these 
cases, it's your transferable skills that you want to stand out. 

For example, if you're applying for an accounting role but haven't had the 
title of “Accountant,” but you've held a Store Manager job or other jobs 
where you were responsible for several accounting-related duties and 
responsibilities, a hybrid resume could work well and be the right resume 
format for you. 
What is a functional resume format?

In rare cases, you may choose to use a functional resume instead of a 
chronological or combination resume. In this resume format, the focus is 
placed on your skills and abilities broken down by function rather than a 
chronological work history. You'll still include a chronological summary 
of your work history, but it will take a back seat to your skills, so the 
focus stays on what you bring to the table for your target job.  
When should you use a functional resume format?

This format is typically used when your recent work experience doesn't 
support your job goals, or you're dealing with a serious gap in employment 
– like after you've been out of the workforce for several years. In those 
instances, you want to focus on your transferable skills and abilities 
that are relevant to the new job or to overshadow your employment gap. 

Also, you're more likely to land your next job by leveraging your network 
if a functional resume is your best option. In other words, don't expect 
the functional resume to work well with standard online applications since 
it's not well suited for applicant tracking systems and can sometimes be 
confusing for human readers. 
The best way to format your resume

Once you select the right resume format for your circumstances, it's just 
as important to ensure you're correctly styling the information within 
your chosen resume format. Regardless of the format you choose, keep the 
following things in mind:
Work with what you've got

Go back and think about your job goals. If you've recently graduated from 
college, your new degree is likely to be one of your best selling points 
and should be placed towards the top of your resume. However, if you've 
been in the workforce for a while, your years of relevant work experience 
take precedence, and your education and professional development 
activities will likely be placed at the bottom of your resume.
Create white space

More often than not, your resume is being quickly scanned for important 
pieces of information. An organized layout with a clear visual hierarchy 
is key. Avoid including dense blocks of text that the reader's eyes are 
sure to glaze over. 
Center contact information and subheadings

Also, center your contact information and subheadings such as "Work 
Experience," "Education," "Technical Skills," and so forth, since most 
recruiters focus on the center of the resume when scanning for 
information. If your resume exceeds one page, include a header on the 
second page that includes your name and contact information.

Expert tip: Do not place your contact information in the header feature of 
page one. The ATS cannot read headers and could reject your resume if it 
doesn't find contact information. 
Avoid endless bullets

Bullet points are an excellent technique for drawing the reader's eye 
towards important pieces of information. When everything is bulleted, you 
lose that ability.

Instead, when documenting your work experience, dedicate a few lines to 
describe your role and responsibilities and then use bullet points to call 
attention to your noteworthy accomplishments and contributions. This will 
allow you to more easily highlight your relevant achievements and 
qualifications. It's best to stick with three to five bullet points for 
each position listed.
Apply the correct margins

Your resume margins can help add length or create white space. Set your 
margins between a half-inch and one inch at the top and bottom and 
three-quarters to one inch on the sides. Anything outside of half-inch 
margins is often cut off when converted to a PDF and not read by an ATS. 
Use a resume-friendly font type and size

Your font type and size need to be easy to read. There are several 
resume-friendly font options to choose from, like Arial, Georgia, Calibri, 
Helvetica, and Cambria. In terms of font size, go with between  14 and 16 
point sizing for titles and headers and 10 and 12 points for the text 
content within each resume section. 
Consider your line spacing

If your lines are spaced too close together, they can blend together and 
make it difficult for the reader to follow. Go with double line spacing 
following headings and between 1.15 and 1.5 point spacing between text.
Stick to two pages or less

Your resume should be one to two pages in length at maximum. Though some 
may suggest sticking to one page if you're an entry-level employee, that's 
no longer the case. Suppose you have plenty of relevant experience from 
things like internships, part-time jobs, and extracurricular activities. 
In that case, having a two-page resume as a college graduate or 
entry-level employee is fine. That said, if a one-page resume tells a 
powerful career story, regardless of your career level, use a one-page 
resume. 

Regarding three pages, in very rare instances, should your resume ever go 
over two pages. Here are some examples of when you might have a three-page 
resume:

    You've been requested to list all of your work history in great detail

    You're applying for a federal job that requires extensive details

    You're applying for a job in academia where a longer resume is 
expected

    You're applying to a high-level senior or executive role

    You're a contractor or freelancer with a lot of projects to include

    You've participated in a lot of extracurriculars, like public speaking 
or research projects

Apply ATS-friendly standards

Let's say your resume doesn't get past an employer's ATS. In that case, it 
won't be read by a human reader, meaning you've wasted your time. No one 
wants that.

To avoid this scenario, writing your resume with an ATS in mind is 
essential. Here are some tips to help improve your chances of bypassing an 
employer's ATS:

    If you're using acronyms, be sure to spell out the abbreviations the 
first time they're used in your resume to improve the chances of an ATS 
understanding them.

    Don't include images, tables, or charts, as they can be difficult for 
an ATS to read and interpret.

    Incorporate keywords from the job description to optimize your resume 
for an ATS.

    Avoid creative or fancy designs that might be difficult for an ATS to 
read – a modern, simple resume format is best.

    Submit your resume as an 8.5 x 11 size Word doc vs. a PDF file.

    Don't include important information in the header or footer sections 
of your resume. An ATS cannot read information in these areas of a resume. 

    Avoid using a two-column approach to formatting the text of your 
resume.

Emphasize where appropriate

It can be helpful to emphasize some aspects of your resume to better guide 
the reader in finding the information they seek more easily. Ways to 
create emphasis include:

    Bolding text

    Underlining text

    Increasing font size

Section headers, for example, should be highlighted by bolding or 
underlining the section title and using a slightly larger font size than 
the text between sections. If you have a very special or significant 
project that you've completed or worked on, you might choose to emphasize 
that by bolding it, as well. 
Use consistent formatting 

As you write your resume, use consistent formatting throughout if you 
don't want to risk looking unprofessional. This includes using the same:

    Bullet type

    Font and size for text content

    Font and size for section headings 

    Formatting for dates used in your work experience and education 
sections

Left align text 

In your work experience section, it's best to left-align the text. 
Left-aligned text is easier for most to read when there are large blocks 
of text on a page.
Be succinct

Your resume should only include relevant information written as concisely 
as possible. This is especially important if you find your resume is 
spilling onto a third page. Where can you remove filler words or tighten 
the text so that it's as brief as possible while still telling the story 
you want it to tell?
Include the right type of contact information

Employers expect to see specific items when it comes to your contact 
information. This includes your first and last name at the top of your 
resume, followed by your:

    Phone number

    Email address

    City and state

It's also common to include your LinkedIn URL with your contact 
information. 
List your education in reverse chronological order

Regardless of the resume format you choose, it's standard practice to list 
your education in reverse chronological order, with your most recent 
degree listed first. An exception to this is if an earlier degree is more 
relevant to the job you're applying to. In that case, you can list the 
most relevant degree first and the rest in reverse chronological order. 
Remove outdated information

Be sure your resume doesn't include outdated information, like a resume 
objective statement in most instances and your complete mailing address. 
Including this information will make it appear you're not up-to-date with 
current resume standards. 
Avoid including personal information

It's important to note that your resume should not contain any personally 
identifiable information, such as your date of birth, marital status, or 
parental status. Avoid including photos, as well. Many countries, like the 
U.S., have stringent anti-discrimination laws. In those countries, 
employers are likely to toss your resume in the trash bin if it has this 
type of information due to the risk of discrimination claims. 
Choose the right resume format for your unique circumstances

Now that you know what some of the best resume formats are to consider and 
when to use them for specific circumstances, which is the right resume 
format for you? Regardless of what format you choose, use the above 
formatting tips to create the best resume possible to get noticed, land 
interviews, and get that job offer. 
