Google Recruiters Say Using the X-Y-Z Formula on Your Resume Will Improve 
Your Odds of Getting Hired at Google

Alternative: Reverse engineer their advice and improve recruitment at your 
business.

EXPERT OPINION BY BILL MURPHY JR., FOUNDER OF UNDERSTANDABLY AND 
CONTRIBUTING EDITOR, INC. @BILLMURPHYJR
SEP 13, 2019
getty_962098266_200013331653767284135.jpg

Getty Images

More than two million people apply to work for Google each year, which is 
more than 20 times the number of employees at the company at any given 
time.

With that kind of volume, it makes sense that Google proactively tries to 
tell applicants what they should do to improve their odds of getting 
noticed within the herd.

Among its tools are a series of YouTube videos and articles detailing best 
practices for resumes (embedded below, along with two articles by Google’s 
former senior vice president of personnel operations).

Here are some of the most important resume tips the company offers, 
including the simple, three-part formula that Google says applicants 
should always use. Even if you’re not eager to work at Google, reverse 
engineering their expectations could give you some smart ideas regarding 
how to ask candidates to apply for opportunities with your business.

FEATURED VIDEO

This Health Food Founder Would Rather Go Broad Than Niche
1. Basic formatting

Google rarely requests or even looks at a cover letter, so there is a lot 
riding on resumes. At the outset, the key rule is to keep things simple 
when it comes to format, and ensure that your resume is highly readable. 
That includes things like:

    Formatting your resume as a pdf. This seems like a no-brainer in 2019, 
but Google’s guides repeat this advice several times, so we have to assume 
not everyone does this automatically.
    Skipping the objective. (They know what your objective is: to land 
this particular job.)
    Using black text, and keep the font and size clean, simple, and 
consistent. 
    Checking for typos. This is so important, we’ll say it again: Check 
for typos. 
    Using bullet points. (How’s this for meta advice, since you’re reading 
it in a bullet point?) Don’t include long lines of descriptive text. Put 
yourself in the place of a human resume-reviewer, who is likely reading 
dozens of resumes at a time. 
    Making sure you include your contact info. Yes, this seems obvious — 
but make sure your name and email address are prominent. If you’re 
applying for technical positions, include your Github link (more on that 
below).

2. Customization

You should write a new, tailored resume for every position you apply for. 
Also, the Google recruiters advise keeping it under a single page.

The exception to this is that if you are applying for a technical or 
engineering position, you can legitimately have a large number of relevant 
projects to list, and that might take you to a second page.

But for almost any other type of position, one page is the rule.

This also means that you have to be a ruthless editor. If you have tons of 
relative experience, you’ll want to describe it all as succinctly as 
possible, while still getting your message across.

One specific piece of advice is that if any bullet point on your resume 
spills over by a word or two into a second line, figure out a way to write 
it shorter, so it stays on one line. Space is at a premium with a 
suggested one-page maximum.
3. Use the X by Y by Z formula

This is the crux of the advice by Laszlo Bock, a former Google senior vice 
president of personnel operations. You want to adhere to the bullet-point 
format as we’ve discussed, and articulate your experience in this specific 
way.

Google describes this as: “Accomplished [X] as measured by [Y], by doing 
[Z].” But just to make it easier to remember, let’s shorten it to X-Y-Z.  

This means that you want to focus on accomplishments — quantitative 
results and the impact that you had as a result. It’s probably easiest to 
explain this by using a few examples from the Google recruiters’ YouTube 
videos themselves.

For example, imagine an applicant who wants to make clear that he or she 
is a member of a prestigious group. Here’s the OK way, the better way, and 
the best way to describe this on a resume, according to Google:

    OK: “Member of Leadership for Tomorrow Society”
    Better: “Selected as one of 275 for this 12-month professional 
development program for high-achieving diverse talent.”
    Best: “Selected as one of 275 participants nationwide for this 
12-month professional development program for high-achieving diverse 
talent based on leadership potential and academic success.”

Here’s another example, this one for a technical position in which the 
applicant wants to point out that he or she placed second in a hackathon.

    OK: “Won second place in hackathon.”
    Better: “Won second place out of 50 teams in hackathon.”
    Best: “Won second place out of 50 teams in hackathon at NJ Tech by 
working with two colleagues to develop an app that synchronizes mobile 
calendars.

(In this case, the last, “best” is my own interpretation; Google doesn’t 
actually provide the third suggestion. But I hope the point is clear.)

Here’s a final example, intended for a business applicant who wants to 
show how much he or she contributed in a client support role: 

    OK: “Grew revenue for small and medium business clients.”
    Better: “Grew revenue for small and medium business clients by 10% 
QoQ”
    Best: “Grew revenue for 15 small and medium business clients by 10% 
QoQ by mapping new software features as solutions to their business 
goals.”

One point about jargon: Use shorthand like “QoQ” (for quarter over 
quarter) only if you’re 100 percent sure that the resume reviewer will 
know exactly what you mean.
4. Advanced formatting

Beyond the basic formatting issues, like keeping it to one page and using 
bullet points, there are some slightly more advanced formatting issues to 
consider.

You want to be sure to organize things in the same way that recruiters and 
reviewers are used to seeing them. The rules include:

    education before experience if you’re a student or a relatively recent 
graduate, or 
    experience before education (in reverse chronological order), if 
you’ve been in the workforce for more than a position or two. 

For recent graduates, Google insists on school, degree, major, GPA, and 
month and year of graduation. But the further away you are from college, 
the less college and university information you’re expected to include. 

“Generally the more recently you attended university, the more detail you 
should include here,” Google technical recruiter Jeremy Ong says in one of 
the videos.

The one caveat here, and frankly it’s not something that Google addresses, 
is how to handle year of graduation if you’re an older applicant.

There’s a point at which Google probably doesn’t want to know your age, so 
as to reduce the odds of ever having to defend against an age 
discrimination claim. Obviously putting on your resume that you graduated 
from college in 1990 suggests you’re well over 40.

Beyond that, however, focus on things that are most relevant for the 
position, and don’t be afraid to cut older positions and achievements, 
especially if they’re not relevant. 

If you have a lengthy work history that would push you beyond the one-page 
suggested maximum length, you might add a short, additional section 
mentioning that you have other, less relevant experience, without going 
into great detail.
5. For technical applicants

If you’re applying for technical or engineering jobs, there are a couple 
of additional pieces of advice.

The first is to include your Github link, or equivalent, at the top with 
your contact information. (Ironic, since Microsoft has owned Github since 
last year.)

Additionally, the recruiters want to see your programming languages listed 
prominently. And as you list projects and experience — either in a 
separate section or as part of your employment history — include 
programming languages you used for each project.

Obviously, this is all for step one in the recruiting process — the resume 
and application — and Google has other videos on later-stage items like 
how to prepare for specific types of interviews.

But even as someone who isn’t likely to apply for a job with Google or any 
other company anytime soon, I found it helpful in terms of the information 
to ask for when recruiting and interviewing.

Here are the links I promised, including two articles by Bock (here and 
here), and the two key YouTube videos, How to: Work at Google — Resume 
Tips and Create Your Resume for Google: Tips and Advice.

Have you ever heard of the google XYZ resume format? As the leading trend 
in the recruitment industry, it is a tool that contributes to your job 
search. Your resume is a controllable element in your job application. If 
you can tailor it well to include this format while making it 
ATS-friendly, you’re one step closer into an organization.

Remember, your resume should be able to get you past those scanning bots, 
to the recruiter’s table and onto a proper interview. In this article, 
I’ll explain what the XYZ resume format is, why it’s important and how to 
use it to secure a job interview. 

Table of Contents

    What is The XYZ Resume Format?
    Why is The XYZ Resume Format Important?
    Frequently Asked Questions
        What makes the XYZ resume format effective? 
        What should a sentence structure in the X-Y-Z format look like?
        What are some components of an effective resume?
        What are some of the biggest resume mistakes to watch out for?
    8 Tips For Important Resume tips
    To wrap up,

What is The XYZ Resume Format?

This resume format is sophisticated yet straightforward. In one sentence, 
it includes what you’ve accomplished (X) + the qualitative results (Y) + 
the skills or experience you utilized to achieve the outcome (Z). 
Essentially, it’s an easy-to-read, concise, and practical way to provide 
context and flow.
Why is The XYZ Resume Format Important?

Nowadays, most recruiters don’t enjoy going through only “what you have 
done” in the past; they most often want to see “how you did it” and “the 
results”. With the XYZ resume format, you hone in on specific achievements 
and impress your hiring manager with past results. It also helps work well 
with applicant tracking systems (ATS) as you’ll be able to include 
specific keywords. Since most recruiters are always looking for the ‘X-Y-Z 
formula’ in resumes, you should definitely use it. Sounds interesting? We 
have more valuable tips to give you to land a job! Visit us at our 
services page to learn more.
Frequently Asked Questions

    What makes the XYZ resume format effective? 

    This resume format often starts with an active verb that helps provide 
clarity to the reader while demonstrating your confidence and active 
participation in your previous work. Following the active verb is your 
achievement – what you did and how you did it, which helps you focus on 
the most relevant experience and results for the position while providing 
a baseline for comparison and details of what you did to achieve your 
goal.

    The use of facts, numbers or figures, which the XYZ resume format 
allows, helps to add credibility and gives insight into your strengths. 
This resume format provides the reader with a concise context and a smooth 
flow while reading your resume. Simultaneously, they get the gist of your 
achievement and how you are the best candidate for that position with your 
proven results. 
    What should a sentence structure in the X-Y-Z format look like?

    A sentence structure in the X-Y-Z format should look like this: action 
verb, achievement, measurement, detail of what you did to achieve your 
goal. Here’s an example of correct XYZ resume formatting:

    Formular: Accomplished [X] as measured by [Y], by doing [Z].

    X is in red

    Y is in green

    Z is in blue 

    Negotiated reduction in costs to perform post-delivery support by 40% 
($900k) with XYZ by designing and using results from an online auction of 
multiple vendors.

    Grew revenue for 15 small and medium business clients by 10% QoQ by 
mapping new software features as solutions to their business goals.
    What are some components of an effective resume?

    An effective resume should include at least seven sections. The first 
three shows your name, contact information and your executive summary or 
objective. The following two include your relevant work experiences that 
show what you’ve done in the past and the results that came from it, with 
appropriate and applicable skills that match the job descriptions. An 
effective resume should also contain relevant links, traceable educational 
background, and additional information to give you extra points and 
standings with the recruiter.
    What are some of the biggest resume mistakes to watch out for?

        Spelling and grammar typos – Although they can seem obvious, as a 
result of tweaking resumes back and forth to fit the job descriptions, you 
can be vulnerable to this kind of error. Read your resume from bottom to 
top to help you focus on each line in isolation or have someone proofread 
it.
        Your resume length – Ideally, a one-page resume is good and if you 
have a lot of relevant work experience in line with the job offer, opt for 
a 2-page resume. If you have qualified working experience that goes back 
20 years, delete it once they’re irrelevant to the job descriptions.
        Other mistakes include poor formatting, not including your contact 
information, adding confidential information and using a generic resume 
for all your job positions you’re applying to. 

8 Tips For Important Resume tips

These days, some organizations rarely ask for a cover letter, so there is 
a lot of emphasis on resumes. And whether you are looking for part-time or 
full-time work, an internship, or considering changing your career path, 
it’s essential to make yourself well suited for the job position. Here are 
eight crucial resume tips that should be noted while constructing your 
resume.

In-Body Image of How to Create an Effective Resume XYZ Resume Format

1. Do the basic formatting.

The fundamental rule is to keep things simple when formatting and ensure 
that your resume is readable. Make your resume simple and give it a 
professional look by using black text with consistent font size, style, 
and design elements to avoid distracting the recruiters. Format your 
resume as a pdf, and before hitting the submit button, check for typos, 
use bullet points and make sure your contact info is up-to-date. 

2. Incorporate keyword phrases.

Include the exact keywords and key phrases from the job description in 
your resume summary, skills, and professional work experience. You could 
copy them from the job description, paste them into your resume, and write 
words around them to make sure it fits together. Applicant tracking 
systems calculate the number of years you’ve practiced a particular skill, 
so adding and repeating industry-specific keywords in each job description 
will serve you well. 

3. Customize your resume to fit the job description.

Make sure to adapt your resume and tailor it to the job requirement by 
avoiding irrelevant work experience and unnecessary information. If you 
have tons of relevant experience, you’ll want to describe it while still 
getting your message across briefly. As much as possible, keep your resume 
under a single page except when you’re applying for a technical position 
requiring multiple project experiences, which might take you onto a second 
page.

4. Use the XYZ resume format.

You should articulate your work experience to fit the one-page rule by 
using the popular google XYZ resume format, which is the crux of this 
article. Google describes this as “Accomplished [X] as measured by [Y], by 
doing [Z].” 

Start with your accomplishment (don’t forget to include an action verb 
before your achievement), add the qualitative evidence of your result 
(numbers and facts), and don’t forget to add the skills you used to 
achieve. This resume format shows a lot of credibilities, and efficiency, 
while maintaining the flow of communication to the reader. 

5. Reduce industry shorthands.

A point about industry shorthands is that they come off as you being aware 
of the trends in the industry, but the disadvantage to using them is that 
you may never know who is reading your resume. Industry-specific 
terminologies may consist of complex industry words that might not be easy 
to understand by people not active in that industry and may not be in the 
ATS. For example, a person from the software team who is part of the 
hiring team may not quickly grasp the meaning of shorthands like “QoQ” 
(for the quarter over quarter). So, only use relevant and straightforward 
industry shorthands if you’re 100% sure that the resume reviewer will know 
what you mean.

6. Include numbers, metrics, or data. 

Drop the old-fashioned resume that contains only text, and use numbers, 
metrics, and data. For example: Grew revenue for 15 small and medium 
business clients by 10% QoQ by mapping new software features as solutions 
to their business goals. 

It’s even more impressive if you can add a comparison, for example, 
“…compared to an average of 8 small and medium business clients by 5% QoQ 
from my peers.” Providing meaningful comparison and factual data helps.

7. Add your name and contact info to page 2.

If you’re going to use a 2-page resume format, make sure your up-to-date 
contact information is on both pages. Your first page might not be 
convincing enough to the hiring manager, but seeing a skill relevant to 
the job description may prompt them to tag your name down for the 
interview. So your name and contact info on the second page would provide 
the recruiter with your ID. 

8. Add relevant links and contact info.

How annoyed do you get when you try to reach someone over the phone a 
couple of times, and all you get is a voice message saying: this number 
doesn’t exist or is not reachable? Now imagine your interviewer going 
through the same thing. Make sure your resume has clickable links and 
contact info that can help your recruiters reach you or see proof of the 
recent projects you’ve done. 

Additionally, for technical applicants, if you’re going to be adding your 
GitHub links to projects you’ve worked on, make sure the programming 
languages you used for each are listed prominently alongside each project.
To wrap up,

There are many formulas for successful resume writing, but the google XYZ 
resume format is one of the most coveted for employers. This formula makes 
your resume easy to read without compromising the credibility of your 
achievements. 

Although it may be hard to quantify your hard work, there is almost always 
something you can point to that differentiates you from others. You can’t 
control the biases and attention span of whoever reviews your resume, but 
you can control what’s on the page in front of them. Use the formula, and 
recruiters will take notice.
